Let's start by coding some really basic
examples with just the Web Audio API.
And I'm gonna be using a little
bit of p5.js as well just to sorta
visualize just circles,
squares, things like that.
But primarily, I'm gonna be focusing
on the audio side of things.
Now, you can either go into
the Web Audio demos on Glitch, and
then open that up and hit the link here,
maybe open it in a new tab.
I've got it open here in one of them, and
it might take a little while to load.
It might not even load right away
depending on how glitch is doing today.
So because I've just been
having some issues there,
I've also got it running locally.
And so if you wanna run it locally,
you can clone the repository.
So I've cloned it,
I've copied it onto my desktop or
any folder you like,
you CD into it and your terminal and
then you run npm install to
install the dependencies.
This is using npm and
node.js which I explained a little bit in
my other workshops with front-end masters.
But I'm not gonna go into too
much detail on that here.
And once you've installed it,
once you've hit npm install and
hit Enter and run the installation,
then you can just run npm start and
it should open a local listing here
with all of the different HTML sketches.
And these correspond exactly to the
different sketches in the glitch demos,
so you can follow along either way
whether you wanna go into glitch and
follow along there and sort of remix
there or just run it locally and
open them up in your browser.
So this first one is a big play button and
all it is is just playing an MP3 file.
[MUSIC]
And then pausing it or stopping it.
The one thing that's a little bit
different about this is that we're
playing a long background track so
when we're playing MP3 files, we kinda
have to decide if the file is a long one
that we want to stream in over time.
So imagine you had a very long 20 minute
composition and you wanted to play that
through the browser, you wouldn't have to
wait for that entire thing to download,
you just wanna play it and
as it's downloading, you play that audio.
And so that's where we're gonna use
this demo here is using the audio tag,
which is the HTML5 audio tag.
And that's gonna allow us to stream
the MP3 file or WAV file or OGG file or
whatever sorta sound-based file
you're using, it's gonna allow us
to stream it through the browser so that
we don't have to load it all up front.
And then the next thing after that, we're
gonna talk about how to buffer things for
different purposes.
But this is great for
like background music and long tracks and
things like that.
So I'm gonna go into the code editor and
I'm just gonna open up this demo here and
close all my other tabs.
And I'm gonna just shrink
this a little bit.
So the basic structure of these demos is
we have some global variables up here
at the top.
So typically, we're gonna have
a variable called audio context, and
that's gonna be the variable that holds
all of the details associated with
the audio API itself,
that's kinda the starting point.
Any kind of web audio API application
is using this audio context.
And then we're gonna maybe some times have
some variables that will be specifically
around the notes that we're using.
So in this case, we just have one
audio note here that we're using.
We're doing everything on mousePressed.
So I'm using this function from
p5.js called mousePressed,
which we'll get run every time
we click on the window anywhere.
And the reason we're using those
press instead of just playing things
automatically, it's because with Web Audio
and with audio in general in the browser,
you can't just play audio
immediately upon the pageload.
That's one of those things
that used to be possible.
And then news websites kinda ruin it for
everyone.
And now we can't really just play audio
right on the opening of a webpage.
Browsers will force the webpage
to first interacted with so
you have to only initiate audio for
the first time on a gesture,
so maybe a keywords, press or click or
some sorta forceful user gesture
that initiates the audio context.
You can actually create the audio
context outside of this and
create all your audio nodes and
only play things on most press but
I like to just sometimes set
everything up within the gesture so
that it doesn't even try to do any audio
related things until you've clicked,
until you've tapped a key or
something like that.
So that's why we're doing
it all in the mousePressed.
And that's also why there's this condition
here which is to say, if we haven't yet
set up our audio context, that's where
this set up sorta stuff is gonna happen.
Cuz once we've set it up once, if we click
again, we don't wanna have to reset up
the audio context, we wanna do something
else like pause the audio let's say.
Just before I dive into this function,
I'll just scroll down a little bit just to
show what a lot of these sketches
are gonna look like today.
They're gonna typically have the sorta
standard p5 functions which is like
a setup, which is gonna allow us to set
up a canvas, like this black canvas here.
And then resize functionality.
So if the browser's resized, the canvas
will resize, and then the draw function.
This is where we can draw shapes and
graphics and start to visualize the audio
and start to sorta output that in
a visual interesting graphic way.
Right now I'm just using it to draw play
button which is this polygon utility,
which you don't really need to
worry about how that works.
But we'll get into the draw function
a little bit later as we start to
visualize things.
So just to focus on the mousePressed.
So I'm actually gonna
start from a clean slate.
Why don't I do that?
And worst case scenario, I might have
to undo a little bit or maybe I'll
just do this, keep it in another tab
just in case I forget anything but
I'd like to start from a clean slate
rather than just talking about lines
of code cuz I think it's a bit easier
to sorta work through this together.
So what we want to do on mousePressed
is first check if we haven't yet
assigned anything to the audio context.
If we haven't yet set up our global
audio context, it's gonna be like this.
Then in here is where we set up our audio.
And the first step is to
create the audio context,
just like this audio context is this
global variable that exists in browsers.
On some older browsers,
you might have to prefix this
with like WebKit audio context.
But just going forward,
I think in the next few years and so on,
we probably won't need to worry so
much about those prefixes.
So I'm gonna just stick with this simple,
just a variable named AudioContext.
And then what we're gonna wanna
do is create an audio tag.
So as I was saying earlier, the HTML5
audio tag is used for streaming audio.
That's what we wanna do in this case.
So we're going to do audio is
equal to document.createElement,
audio, this creates a new audio tag.
You also could have defined
this in react or HTML or
whatever and
then query that with a selector and
then use this in the same way, but
you can just create it like this.
And now what we're gonna do is
set a variable on it called loop.
This is optional but
let's say you're doing a background track,
as in this demo,
you just wanted to loop all the time.
And so
whenever it hits the end of the track,
it's just gonna play again from the start.
Another thing we'll have to do is actually
set the URL for where the asset is.
And this part is gonna be different
depending on whether you're doing this
locally, just as I am here or
whether you're sorta experimenting and
remixing the glitch demos.
If you're working with the glitch demos,
you'll have to drag and
drop your MP3 files onto their platform,
and then use the URLs that they have.
But here in the actual GitHub
repository that I've got online,
I've included an audio folder
with three different test audios.
And so
we can just use a reference to those.
Just for now, you can pull in your
own MP3 files, your own WAV files.
Web Audio supports a variety
of different audio formats.
I tend to stick with MP3
because it has a wide support.
But for some other projects,
you might want to explore other
formats that might be able to
compress a little bit better, or
be able to play in different ways
like streaming a little bit better.
So to set the URL,
we're gonna just do audio.source
is equal to audio/ let's do piano.mp3.
Again, just to comment there.
And then the next thing we're
gonna do is play the audio.
Because this is happening on
a mousePressed gesture, so
it's fine to play audio.
And if we try and save,
because we're using this local server,
it should reload automatically.
And when we click play,
we're gonna hear the audio.
However, we're not using
the Web Audio API yet.
So this audio is playing just
using typical HTML5 Audio API,
which is pretty old school.
We can't do anything
like visualizing it or
adjusting the game really
in a fine controlled way,
we can't do any sorta synthesis with it or
anything like that, can't do any effects.
And so what we wanna do is
take this HTML5 audio and
pipe it into our audio context
that we've created up here.
And so what we're gonna do
to do that is to create
a new source node using
audioContext.createMediaElementSource.
It's like the longest name,
I always forget it.
So it's kinda one of these things that you
sometimes have to Google or something.
But this is going to allow us
to create a source audio node,
which is like one of these little Lego
building blocks that I was talking about
before with wiring things
from one to the other,
using our audio tag, so
we pass in our audio tag as the parameter.
And now if we were to reload the page and
play, we don't hear anything.
And that's because the audio is now
going through the audio context,
the Web Audio API.
And the Web Audio API has one more
step in order to actually hear things.
We have to actually hook it
up to the speaker basically.
So to do that, we're gonna do
source.connect,audioContext.destination.
And this is the wiring up, so
wire the source to the speaker.
Let's call it speaker.
Just like I was saying with the wires
being a switchboard operator, and
now if we play,
[MUSIC]
We should hear some audio.
One more thing we can do here is we
can turn all of this off with a pause
button when we actually click
again the second time so
that we can play in and stop the audio.
So I'm just gonna do an else here.
And then in here,
this is where we're gonna get if
we press once it's already playing.
So I'm gonna say audio.pause, I believe.
And then audio context.close.
And now I'm just gonna do this,
I'm gonna do audio context, and
just set these to know.
Let's just make sure that works.
Yeah, so what I'm doing is I'm first
pausing the audio tag just to be sure that
even if we remove the audio context, the
HTML5 audio is not trying to play anymore.
And then we can actually
close the audio context.
And then we can set them both to know so
that next time we do a mousePressed,
it'll go back to this initial condition.
And that's how we get back to that
state we're sorta starting with.